website/docs: configuration: cleanup postgres section (#14544)
goauthentik/authentik: website/docs/install-config/configuration/configuration.mdx

## PostgreSQL Settings

authentik requires a PostgreSQL database to store its configuration and data. Below are the settings to configure the database connection.

> ### Connection Settings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Connection settings
```

- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__HOST`: Hostname or IP address of your PostgreSQL server.
- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__PORT`: Port on which PostgreSQL is listening. Defaults to the standard PostgreSQL port `5432`.
- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__USER`: Username that authentik will use to authenticate with PostgreSQL.
- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__PASSWORD`: Password for PostgreSQL authentication. If not set, it defaults to the value of the `POSTGRES_PASSWORD` environment variable (this fallback is specific to the default Docker Compose setup).
- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__NAME`: The name of the database for authentik to use.

:::info Hot-reloading

> The `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__HOST`, `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__PORT`, `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__USER`, and `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__PASSWORD` settings support hot-reloading and can be changed without restarting authentik. However, adding or removing read replicas requires a restart.

Reviewer: We could link "read replicas" to our docs on that topic... though not essential.

Reviewer: Yes I mean the same ones you worked on below, on this page, line 93. ;-)

:::

> ### SSL/TLS Settings

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### SSL/TLS settings
```

    - `verify-full`: Require SSL, verify the CA, and verify that the server hostname matches the certificate.

- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__SSLROOTCERT`: Path to the CA certificate file for verifying the server's certificate. Required for `verify-ca` and `verify-full` modes.

- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__SSLCERT`: Path to the client SSL certificate file. Required if the PostgreSQL server is configured for mutual TLS and requires client certificates.

- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__SSLKEY`: Path to the private key for the client certificate (`SSLCERT`).

For more details, see [Django's PostgreSQL documentation](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/ref/databases/#postgresql-connection-settings) or the [PostgreSQL documentation](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/libpq-ssl.html#LIBPQ-SSL-PROTECTION).

### Connection Management

These settings control connection persistence and behavior, which is particularly important when using a connection pooler like PgBouncer.

- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__CONN_MAX_AGE`: The maximum age of a database connection in seconds.
    - `0` (default): Connections are closed after each request.

>     - `> 0`: Enables persistent connections, with the value defining the maximum lifetime.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - greater than `0`: Enables persistent connections, with the value defining the maximum lifetime.
```
Much more readable, and doesn't imply that `> 0` is a valid setting, which it isn't.

### Advanced Settings

- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__DEFAULT_SCHEMA` :ak-version[2024.12]

    The name of the database schema for authentik to use. Defaults to `public`.

    This can only be set before authentik is started for the first time. If you specify a custom schema, it must already exist in the database, and the user authentik connects with must have permissions to access it. The `search_path` for the database user must also be configured to include this schema.

### Read Replicas

You can configure additional read replica databases to distribute database load and improve performance. When read replicas are configured, authentik automatically routes query operations between the primary database (for writes) and read replica databases (for queries). By default, the primary database won't be used for queries when read replicas are available. If you want the primary database to also handle queries, add it as a read replica.

> To configure authentik to use read replicas, add the settings below to your [configuration file](./configuration.mdx#set-your-environment-variables). If you have multiple read replicas, add settings for each by replacing the default `0` with a unique value for each additional read replica.

Author: ```suggestion
To configure authentik to use read replicas, add the settings below to your [configuration file](./configuration.mdx#set-your-environment-variables). If you have multiple read replicas, add settings for each one by using a unique index starting from `0` (e.g., `0`, `1`, `2`, etc.).
```

> To configure authentik to use read replicas, add the settings below to your [configuration file](./configuration.mdx#set-your-environment-variables). If you have multiple read replicas, add settings for each by replacing the default `0` with a unique value for each additional read replica.

Author: as indexes start at 0

    When setting this value to any non-standard value, the schema must already exist in the database, and the user authentik connects with must have access to it. Additionally, the `search_path` of the authentik database must be set to include this schema.

The PostgreSQL settings `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__HOST`, `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__PORT`, `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__USER`, and `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__PASSWORD` support hot-reloading, which means they can be changed without restarting authentik. However, adding and removing read replicas does not support hot-reloading and requires a restart.

### SSL Configuration

- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__SSLMODE`: Controls how strictly SSL certificates are verified when connecting to PostgreSQL. Defaults to `verify-ca`. Possible values include:
    - `disable`: No SSL is used.
    - `allow`: Use SSL if available, but don't verify.
    - `prefer`: Try SSL first, but fall back to non-SSL if that fails.
    - `require`: Use SSL without certificate verification.
    - `verify-ca`: Verify that the server certificate is signed by a trusted certificate authority.
    - `verify-full`: Verify both the server certificate and that the hostname matches.

> 

Reviewer 3: Could potentially link to the PostgreSQL docs for more info: https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/libpq-ssl.html#LIBPQ-SSL-PROTECTION

It covers some specifics that the django docs don't.

Not essential

- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__SSLROOTCERT`: Specifies the file path to the Certificate Authority (CA) certificate used to verify the PostgreSQL server's SSL certificate. Required when using `verify-ca` or `verify-full` modes.

- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__SSLCERT`: Specifies the file path to the client certificate that authentik will present to the PostgreSQL server for mutual TLS authentication. Only needed if your PostgreSQL server requires client certificate authentication.

- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__SSLKEY`: Specifies the file path to the private key corresponding to the client certificate specified in `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__SSLCERT`. Used to prove authentik's identity to the PostgreSQL server.

    See [Django's PostgreSQL documentation](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/ref/databases/#postgresql-connection-settings) for more details on these settings.

- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__CONN_MAX_AGE`: Maximum age of a database connection in seconds. Defaults to `0` (close after each request). Set to a positive value to enable connection persistence or `None` for unlimited persistence.

>     See [Django's documentation on persistent connections](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/ref/databases/#persistent-connections) for details.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    See [Django's documentation on persistent connections](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/ref/databases/#persistent-connections) for more details.
```

- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__CONN_HEALTH_CHECKS`: Enables health checks on persistent database connections before they are reused. Defaults to `false`. Helps prevent the use of stale connections that might have been closed by the server.

    See [Django's documentation](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/ref/settings/#conn-health-checks) for more details on when to enable this feature. Particularly useful when using a connection pooler to detect and recover from stale connections.

> - `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__DISABLE_SERVER_SIDE_CURSORS`: Disables server-side cursors when set to `true`. Defaults to `false`. Server-side cursors can improve performance for large result sets, but are **not compatible** with:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__DISABLE_SERVER_SIDE_CURSORS`: Defaults to `false`. Disables server-side cursors when set to `true`. Server-side cursors can improve performance for large result sets, but are **not compatible** with:
```

    - Connection poolers in transaction pooling mode (such as PgBouncer in transaction pooling mode)
    - Cross-database queries
    - Some types of database proxies

    **Set this to `true` if you're using PgBouncer in transaction pooling mode or experiencing cursor-related errors.**

    See [Django's documentation on transaction pooling and server-side cursors](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/ref/databases/#transaction-pooling-and-server-side-cursors) for more details.

### Deprecated Settings

> - `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__USE_PGBOUNCER`: Adjusts the database configuration to support connections to a PgBouncer connection pooler. Deprecated and will be removed in a future version. Instead, use the configuration described in the [Using a PostgreSQL Connection Pooler](#using-a-postgresql-connection-pooler) section.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__USE_PGBOUNCER`: Adjusts the database configuration to support connections to a PgBouncer connection pooler. This setting is deprecated and will be removed in a future version. Instead, use the configuration described in the [Using a PostgreSQL Connection Pooler](#using-a-postgresql-connection-pooler) section.
```

> - `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__USE_PGPOOL`: Adjusts the database configuration to support connections to a Pgpool connection pooler. Deprecated and will be removed in a future version. Instead, use the configuration described in the [Using a PostgreSQL Connection Pooler](#using-a-postgresql-connection-pooler) section.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__USE_PGPOOL`: Adjusts the database configuration to support connections to a Pgpool connection pooler. This setting is deprecated and will be removed in a future version. Instead, use the configuration described in the [Using a PostgreSQL Connection Pooler](#using-a-postgresql-connection-pooler) section.
```

### Read Replicas

> You can configure additional replica databases to distribute database load and improve performance. When replicas are configured, authentik automatically routes query operations between the primary database (for writes) and replica databases (for queries). By default, the primary database won't be used for queries when replicas are available. If you want the primary database to also handle queries, simply add it as a replica too.
> 
> To configure authentik to use replicas, add the settings below to your [configuration file](./configuration.mdx#set-your-environment-variables). If you have multiple replicas, add settings for each replica by replacing the default `0` with a unique value for each additional replica.

Reviewer 3: Not essential.

```suggestion
You can configure additional read replica databases to distribute database load and improve performance. When read replicas are configured, authentik automatically routes query operations between the primary database (for writes) and read replica databases (for queries). By default, the primary database won't be used for queries when read replicas are available. If you want the primary database to also handle queries, add it as a read replica.

To configure authentik to use read replicas, add the settings below to your [configuration file](./configuration.mdx#set-your-environment-variables). If you have multiple read replicas, add settings for each by replacing the default `0` with a unique value for each additional read replica.
```

> The same PostgreSQL settings as described above are used for each read replica. For example, for the first replica (index `0`):

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The same PostgreSQL settings as described above are used for each read replica. For example, for the first read replica (index `0`):
```

## PostgreSQL Settings

### Basic Connection Settings

- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__HOST`: Defines the hostname or IP address of your PostgreSQL server where authentik will store its data.
- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__NAME`: Specifies the name of the database that authentik will use within PostgreSQL.
- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__USER`: Defines the username that authentik will use to authenticate with PostgreSQL.
- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__PORT`: Specifies the port on which PostgreSQL is listening. Defaults to the standard PostgreSQL port `5432`.

> - `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__PASSWORD`: Defines the password that authentik will use to authenticate with PostgreSQL. If not specified, defaults to the value of the environment variable `POSTGRES_PASSWORD`.

Author: Only when using default compose. need to add note

> - `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__PASSWORD`: Defines the password that authentik will use to authenticate with PostgreSQL. If not specified, defaults to the value of the environment variable `POSTGRES_PASSWORD`. Note that this default behavior only applies when using the default Docker Compose configuration.

Reviewer 2: let's have this order:
- host
- port
- user
- password
- name
- schema_name

  {/* TODO: Temporarily deactivated feature, see https://github.com/goauthentik/authentik/issues/14320 */}
  {/* - `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__USE_POOL`: Use a [connection pool](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/ref/databases/#connection-pool) for PostgreSQL connections. Defaults to `false`. :ak-version[2025.4] */}
- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__DEFAULT_SCHEMA`: Defines the name of the schema used by default in the database. Defaults to `public`. :ak-version[2024.12]

>     It is only supported to change this value before the initial start of authentik.

Reviewer: This seems like it is worth a Note. Also let's not start sentences with "It" because that causes cognitive effort to determine what "it" refers to. ;-)

And actually why do we leave this sentence here, when that same content is repeated down on line 83?

Author: will add to line 77

    When setting this value to any non-standard value, the schema must already exist in the database, and the user authentik connects with must have access to it. Additionally, the `search_path` of the authentik database must be set to include this schema.

The PostgreSQL settings `HOST`, `PORT`, `USER`, and `PASSWORD` support hot-reloading, which means they can be changed without restarting authentik. However, adding and removing read replicas does not support hot-reloading and requires a restart.

### SSL Configuration

> - `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__SSLMODE`: Controls how strictly SSL certificates are verified when connecting to PostgreSQL. Defaults to `verify-ca`. Possible values include:

Author: I think so for the default, but if PG offers no CA it can't verify nothing (?). need to confirm

    - `disable`: No SSL is used.
    - `allow`: Use SSL if available, but don't verify.
    - `prefer`: Try SSL first, but fall back to non-SSL if that fails.
    - `require`: Use SSL without certificate verification.
    - `verify-ca`: Verify that the server certificate is signed by a trusted certificate authority.
    - `verify-full`: Verify both the server certificate and that the hostname matches.

- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__SSLROOTCERT`: Specifies the file path to the Certificate Authority (CA) certificate used to verify the server's SSL certificate. Required when using `verify-ca` or `verify-full` modes.

> - `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__SSLCERT`: Specifies the file path to the client certificate that authentik will present to the PostgreSQL server for mutual TLS authentication. Only needed if your PostgreSQL server requires client certificate authentication.

Author: no possessive on pg server

- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__SSLKEY`: Specifies the file path to the private key corresponding to the client certificate specified in `SSLCERT`. Used to prove authentik's identity to the PostgreSQL server.

### Connection Management

- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__CONN_MAX_AGE`: Controls how long database connections are kept open in seconds. Defaults to `0` (connections are closed after each request). Possible values:

    - `0`: No persistent connections.
    - Any positive integer: Number of seconds to keep connections open.
    - `null`: Unlimited persistent connections.

    See [Django's documentation](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/ref/settings/#conn-max-age) for more details on how this affects performance and resource usage.

> - `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__CONN_HEALTH_CHECKS`: Enables health checks on persistent database connections before they are reused. Helps prevent the use of stale connections that might have been closed by the server. Defaults to `false`. Possible values:

Author: do we need "possible values" if it's boolean

Reviewer: I agree that the possible values are not needed... it's ok to list them if you prefer but it would be leaner to simple state that it defaults to `false` and people will know the other value is `true`.

    - `true`: Perform health checks.
    - `false`: Do not perform health checks.

>     See [Django's documentation](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/ref/settings/#conn-health-checks) for more details on when to enable this feature. Particularly useful when using a connection pooler to detect and recover from stale connections.

Author: more specific href

> - `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__DISABLE_SERVER_SIDE_CURSORS`: Disables server-side cursors when set to `true`. Server-side cursors can improve performance for large result sets but may not be compatible with all database configurations. Defaults to `false`. Possible values:

Author: mabye define with what configs they are compatible right here to help the user?

>     - `true`: Disable server-side cursors.

Author: no need for this if boolean

    - `false`: Enable server-side cursors.

    See [Django's documentation](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/ref/settings/#disable-server-side-cursors) for more details on when you might want to disable server-side cursors.

> - `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__POOL_OPTIONS`: Allows passing extra configuration options to the [ConnectionPool object](https://www.psycopg.org/psycopg3/docs/api/pool.html#psycopg_pool.ConnectionPool) when it is created. The value must be a base64-encoded JSON dictionary. Ignored when `USE_POOL` is set to `false`. :ak-version[2025.4]

Author: use full env var name

> - `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__POOL_OPTIONS`: Allows passing extra configuration options to the [ConnectionPool object](https://www.psycopg.org/psycopg3/docs/api/pool.html#psycopg_pool.ConnectionPool) when it is created. The value must be a base64-encoded JSON dictionary. Ignored when `USE_POOL` is set to `false`. :ak-version[2025.4]

Reviewer 2: This should be commented out, and use_pool moved just before it

### Deprecated Settings

- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__USE_PGBOUNCER`: Adjusts the database configuration to support connections to a PgBouncer connection pooler. Deprecated and will be removed in a future version. Instead, use the configuration described in the [Using a PostgreSQL Connection Pooler](#using-a-postgresql-connection-pooler) section.
- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__USE_PGPOOL`: Adjusts the database configuration to support connections to a Pgpool connection pooler. Deprecated and will be removed in a future version. Instead, use the configuration described in the [Using a PostgreSQL Connection Pooler](#using-a-postgresql-connection-pooler) section.

### Read Replicas

> You can configure additional read replica databases to distribute database load and improve performance. If read replicas are configured, the main database is not used for reads. If you'd like the main database to be included for reads, add it as a read replica as well.

Author: read read read read, can mabye word it differently

> To configure authentik to use replicas, add the settings below to your [configuration file](./configuration.mdx#set-your-environment-variables). If you have multiple replicas, add settings for each replica by replacing the default `0` with a unique value for each additional replica.

Author: config file is really values.yaml and .env so can mabye be renamed? also: aws cloud formation can we add env vars? original docs may need a touch up.

## PostgreSQL Settings

authentik requires a PostgreSQL database to store its configuration and data. Below are the settings to configure the database connection.

### Connection Settings

- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__HOST`: Hostname or IP address of your PostgreSQL server.
- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__PORT`: Port on which PostgreSQL is listening. Defaults to `5432`.

> - `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__USER`: Username for PostgreSQL authentication.

Author: ```suggestion
- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__USER`: Username that authentik will use to authenticate with PostgreSQL.
```

- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__READ_REPLICAS__0__CONN_HEALTH_CHECKS`
- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__READ_REPLICAS__0__DISABLE_SERVER_SIDE_CURSORS`

### Using a PostgreSQL Connection Pooler

When your PostgreSQL databases are running behind a connection pooler (like PgBouncer or PgPool), you need to adjust several settings to ensure compatibility:

- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__CONN_MAX_AGE`:

>     A connection pooler running in session pool mode (which is the default for PgBouncer) can be incompatible with unlimited persistent connections (`null` setting). When the connection from the pooler to the database is dropped, the pooler will wait for the client to disconnect before releasing the connection. However, this will **never** happen as authentik keeps the connection indefinitely.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    A connection pooler running in session pool mode (which is the default for PgBouncer) can be incompatible with unlimited persistent connections (`null` setting). When the connection from the pooler to the database is dropped, the pooler will wait for the client to disconnect before releasing the connection. However, this will *never* happen as authentik keeps the connection indefinitely.
```

Reviewer: for emphasis we want italics...

    To address this incompatibility, either configure the connection pooler to run in transaction pool mode or set this value lower than any timeout that might cause the connection to be dropped (down to `0` to disable persistent connections).

- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__DISABLE_SERVER_SIDE_CURSORS`:

    When using a connection pooler in transaction pool mode (e.g., PgPool, or PgBouncer in transaction or statement pool mode), you must set this option to `true`. This is required because server-side cursors maintain state across multiple queries, which is incompatible with transaction-based pooling where connections may change between queries.

### Deprecated Settings

- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__USE_PGBOUNCER`: Adjusts the database configuration to support connections to a PgBouncer connection pooler. This setting is deprecated and will be removed in a future version. Instead, use the configuration described in the [Using a PostgreSQL Connection Pooler](#using-a-postgresql-connection-pooler) section.

> - `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__USE_PGPOOL`: Adjusts the database configuration to support connections to a Pgpool connection pooler. This setting is deprecated and will be removed in a future version. Instead, use the configuration described in the [Using a PostgreSQL Connection Pooler](#using-a-postgresql-connection-pooler) section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__USE_PGPOOL`: Adjusts the database configuration to support connections to a PgPool connection pooler. This setting is deprecated and will be removed in a future version. Instead, use the configuration described in the [Using a PostgreSQL Connection Pooler](#using-a-postgresql-connection-pooler) section.
```

Author: technically, my word is right: 

<img width="368" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/cb36cb4f-9714-46c6-a34a-f3b5c1dfa9cf" />

https://www.pgpool.net/mediawiki/index.php/Main_Page

- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__READ_REPLICAS__0__CONN_HEALTH_CHECKS`
- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__READ_REPLICAS__0__DISABLE_SERVER_SIDE_CURSORS`

### Using a PostgreSQL Connection Pooler

When your PostgreSQL databases are running behind a connection pooler (like PgBouncer or PgPool), you need to adjust several settings to ensure compatibility:

- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__CONN_MAX_AGE`:

>     A connection pooler running in session pool mode (which is the default for PgBouncer) can be incompatible with unlimited persistent connections (`null` setting). When the connection from the pooler to the database is dropped, the pooler will wait for the client to disconnect before releasing the connection; however, this will **never** happen as authentik keeps the connection forever.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    A connection pooler running in session pool mode (which is the default for PgBouncer) can be incompatible with unlimited persistent connections (`null` setting). When the connection from the pooler to the database is dropped, the pooler will wait for the client to disconnect before releasing the connection. However, this will **never** happen as authentik keeps the connection indefinitely.
```

>     To address this incompatibility, either configure the connection pooler to run in transaction pool mode, or set this value lower than any timeouts that may cause the connection to be dropped (up to `0` for no persistent connections).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    To address this incompatibility, either configure the connection pooler to run in transaction pool mode or set this value lower than any timeout that might cause the connection to be dropped (down to `0` to disable persistent connections).
```

- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__READ_REPLICAS__0__CONN_HEALTH_CHECKS`
- `AUTHENTIK_POSTGRESQL__READ_REPLICAS__0__DISABLE_SERVER_SIDE_CURSORS`

### Using a PostgreSQL Connection Pooler

> When your PostgreSQL database(s) are running behind a connection pooler (like PgBouncer or PgPool), you need to adjust several settings to ensure compatibility:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When your PostgreSQL databases are running behind a connection pooler (like PgBouncer or PgPool), you need to adjust several settings to ensure compatibility:
```
